Release notes YDB Server 24.4 (#15651)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/changelog-server.md

# {{ ydb-short-name }} Server changelog

## Version 24.4 {#24-4}

### Version 24.4.2 {#24-4-2}

Release date:

#### Functionality

* Enabled by default:

  * support for [views](./concepts/datamodel/view),
  * [auto-partitioning mode](./concepts/topic#autopartitioning) for topics,
  * transactions involving [topics](./concepts/topic) and row-based tables,
  * [volatile distributed transactions](./contributor/datashard-distributed-txs#volatile-transactions),
  * [automatic index selection](./dev/secondary-indexes#avtomaticheskoe-ispolzovanie-indeksov-pri-vyborke) for queries.

* Added the ability to [read and write to a topic](./reference/kafka-api/examples#primery-rabot-s-kafka-api) using the Kafka API without authentication.

#### Bug Fixes

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/14811) issues causing reads to be performed from masters instead of tablet followers. This allowed for a tenfold increase in read speed when using tablet followers.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/14516) an error that caused a lock during dataset confirmation until the completion of a volatile distributed transaction.

Reviewer: Здесь что-то странное написано. Лучше "Fixed an error that caused volatile distributed transactions to sometimes wait for confirmations until the next reboot".

# {{ ydb-short-name }} Server changelog

## Version 24.4 {#24-4}

### Version 24.4.2 {#24-4-2}

Release date:

#### Functionality

* Enabled by default:

>   * support for [views](./concepts/datamodel/view),

Author: Поправила

>   * support for [views](./concepts/datamodel/view),

Author: Поправила

  * [auto-partitioning mode](./concepts/topic#autopartitioning) for topics,
  * transactions involving [topics](./concepts/topic) and row-based tables,
  * [volatile distributed transactions](./contributor/datashard-distributed-txs#volatile-transactions),

>   * [automatic index selection](./dev/secondary-indexes#avtomaticheskoe-ispolzovanie-indeksov-pri-vyborke) for queries.

Author: Что ты имеешь в виду?

>   * [automatic index selection](./dev/secondary-indexes#avtomaticheskoe-ispolzovanie-indeksov-pri-vyborke) for queries.

Author: Предлагаешь вынести в отдельный блок?

>   * [automatic index selection](./dev/secondary-indexes#avtomaticheskoe-ispolzovanie-indeksov-pri-vyborke) for queries.

Reviewer 2: avtomaticheskoe-ispolzovanie-indeksov-pri-vyborke в английской версии не должно быть

>   * [automatic index selection](./dev/secondary-indexes#avtomaticheskoe-ispolzovanie-indeksov-pri-vyborke) for queries.

Reviewer 2: да

# {{ ydb-short-name }} Server changelog

## Version 24.4 {#24-4}

### Version 24.4.2 {#24-4-2}

> Release date:

Reviewer 2: The release date is still missing.

#### Functionality

* Enabled by default:

  * support for [views](./concepts/datamodel/view.md)
  * [auto-partitioning mode](./concepts/topic.md#autopartitioning) for topics
  * transactions involving [topics](./concepts/glossary.md#topic) and [row-oriented tables](./concepts/glossary.md#row-oriented-table) simultaneously
  * [volatile distributed transactions](./contributor/datashard-distributed-txs.md#volatile-transactions)
 

* Added the ability to [read and write to a topic](./reference/kafka-api/examples.md#primery-rabot-s-kafka-api) using the Kafka API without authentication.

#### Performance

> * Enabled by default [automatic index selection](./dev/secondary-indexes.md#avtomaticheskoe-ispolzovanie-indeksov-pri-vyborke) for queries.

Reviewer 2: Russian words in English documentation

# {{ ydb-short-name }} Server changelog

## Version 24.4 {#24-4}

### Version 24.4.4 {#24-4-4}

Release date:

#### Functionality

* Enabled by default:

  * support for [views](./concepts/datamodel/view.md)
  * [auto-partitioning mode](./concepts/topic.md#autopartitioning) for topics
  * transactions involving [topics](./concepts/glossary.md#topic) and [row-oriented tables](./concepts/glossary.md#row-oriented-table) simultaneously
  * [volatile distributed transactions](./contributor/datashard-distributed-txs.md#volatile-transactions)
 

> * Added the ability to [read and write to a topic](./reference/kafka-api/examples.md#primery-rabot-s-kafka-api) using the Kafka API without authentication.

Reviewer 2: Russian words in English

Author: Поправила

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15074) a rare crash in datashard when a dropped table shard is restarted with uncommitted persistent changes.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15194) an error that could disrupt the order of message processing in a topic.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15308) a rare error that could stop reading from a topic partition.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15160) an issue where a transaction could hang if a user performed a control plane operation on a topic (for example, adding partitions or a consumer) while the PQ tablet is moving to another node.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15233) an issue where the counter value for UserInfo was leaking. As a result, the reading session would eventually return a "too big in flight" error.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15467) a proxy crash due to duplicate topics in a request.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15933) a rare bug where a user could write to a topic without any account quota being applied or consumed.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16288) an issue where topic deletion returned "OK" while the topic tablets persisted in a functional state. To remove such tablets, follow the instructions from the [pull request](https://github.com/db-platform/db/pull/16288).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16288) an issue where topic deletion returned "OK" while the topic tablets persisted in a functional state. To remove such tablets, follow the instructions from the [pull request](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16288).
```

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15077) a rare assertion failure (server process crash) when followers attached to leaders with an inconsistent snapshot.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15074) a rare crash in datashard when a dropped table shard is restarted with uncommitted persistent changes.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15194) an error that could disrupt the order of message processing in a topic.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15308) a rare error that could stop reading from a topic partition.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15160) an issue where a transaction could hang if a user performed a control plane operation on a topic (for example, adding partitions or a consumer) while the PQ tablet is moving to another node.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15233) an issue where the counter value for UserInfo was leaking. As a result, the reading session would eventually return a "too big in flight" error.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15467) a proxy crash due to duplicate topics in a request.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15933) a rare bug where a user could write to topic with no account quota being applied or consumed.
> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15941) a rare issue where the scheme shard incorrectly indicated that the topic did not exist when it was actually present.
> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16288) an issue where topic deletion returned "OK" while the topic tablet persisted in a functional state.
> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16418) a rare issue that prevented restoration of a backup for a large indexed table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15933) a rare bug where a user could write to a topic without any account quota being applied or consumed.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15941) a rare issue where the scheme shard incorrectly indicated that the topic did not exist when it was actually present.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16288) an issue where topic deletion returned "OK" while the topic tablet persisted in a functional state.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16418) a rare issue that prevented the restoration of a backup for a large indexed table.
```

# {{ ydb-short-name }} Server changelog

## Version 24.4 {#24-4}

### Version 24.4.4.2 {#24-4-4-2}

Release date: April 14, 2025

#### Functionality

* Enabled by default:

  * support for [views](./concepts/datamodel/view.md)

>   * [auto-partitioning mode](./concepts/topic.md#autopartitioning) for topics;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * [auto-partitioning mode](./concepts/topic.md#autopartitioning) for topics
```

>   * support for [views](./concepts/datamodel/view.md);
>   * [auto-partitioning mode](./concepts/topic.md#autopartitioning) for topics;
>   * [transactions involving topics and row-oriented tables simultaneously](./concepts/transactions.md#topic-table-transactions);
>   * [volatile distributed transactions](./contributor/datashard-distributed-txs.md#volatile-transactions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * support for [views](./concepts/datamodel/view.md)
  * [auto-partitioning mode](./concepts/topic.md#autopartitioning) for topics;
  * [transactions involving topics and row-oriented tables simultaneously](./concepts/transactions.md#topic-table-transactions)
  * [volatile distributed transactions](./contributor/datashard-distributed-txs.md#volatile-transactions)
```

 

* Added the ability to [read and write to a topic](./reference/kafka-api/examples.md#kafka-api-usage-examples) using the Kafka API without authentication.

#### Performance

* Enabled by default automatic secondary index selection for queries.

#### Bug Fixes

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/14811) an error that led to a significant decrease in reading speed from [tablet followers](./concepts/glossary.md#tablet-follower).
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/14516) an error that caused volatile distributed transactions to sometimes wait for confirmations until the next reboot.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15077) a rare assertion failure (server process crash) when followers attached to leaders with an inconsistent snapshot.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15074) a rare crash in datashard when a dropped table shard is restarted with uncommitted persistent changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15074) a rare datashard crash when a dropped table shard is restarted with uncommitted persistent changes.
```

Reviewer 3: Тут больше деталей чем в русской версии

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15194) an error that could disrupt the order of message processing in a topic.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15308) a rare error that could stop reading from a topic partition.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15160) an issue where a transaction could hang if a user performed a control plane operation on a topic (for example, adding partitions or a consumer) while the PQ tablet is moving to another node.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15233) an issue where the counter value for UserInfo was leaking. As a result, the reading session would eventually return a "too big in flight" error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15233) a memory leak issue with the UserInfo counter value. Because of the memory leak, a reading session would eventually return a "too big in flight" error.
```

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15467) a proxy crash due to duplicate topics in a request.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15933) a rare bug where a user could write to a topic without any account quota being applied or consumed.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16288) an issue where topic deletion returned "OK" while the topic tablets persisted in a functional state. To remove such tablets, follow the instructions from the [pull request](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16288).
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16418) a rare issue that prevented the restoration of a backup for a large secondary indexed table.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16637) an issue that caused errors when inserting data using Upsert into row-oriented tables with default values.
> * [Resolved](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16637) a bug that caused failures when executing queries returning lists with multiple inputs and indexes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15862) an issue that caused errors when inserting data using `UPSERT` into row-oriented tables with default values.
* [Resolved](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15334) a bug that caused failures when executing queries that return lists with multiple inputs and indexes.
```

> * [Resolved](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16637) a bug that caused failures when executing queries returning lists with multiple inputs and indexes.

Reviewer 2: What are "lists with multiple inputs and indexes"? Let's explain the bug conditions more precisely.

Author: @gridnevvvit нужна твоя помощь

Author: поправили
